---
title: 'Python Environments'
date: 2023-01-30
permalink: /posts/2023/01/post-4/
tags:
  - python
  - anaconda
---

**_Environments_** in Anaconda and Python allow you to create a named and isolated copy of Python. Within these environments you can work with specefic versions of Python and packages without affecting your base installation. These enviroments make it easy to:

- seperate projects which can rely on both specfic versions of Python and packages (like numpy)
- test, install, and develop new packages without breaking your base installation
- collaborate with others providing a simple way to share/mirror environments. 

Anaconda very simply creates and manages these enviroments using [conda][1] though similar **_Virtual Environemnts_** can be created in Python with [virtualenv][2]. 

This is a sample blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

## Environments - An example

I recently had trouble installing a Python version of the International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) in order to calculate magnetic declinations. I was attempting to install  Michael Hirsch's [_scivision_][5] [IGRF12][6] package from GitHub. Upon installation I kept running into an error with the ```numpy``` package. The IGRF12 installation required a version of numpy that wasn't yet available through Anaconda and which conflicted with other package installtions I had. A new Python environment solved both these problems. 

Within the IGRF12 directory retrieved from GitHub the following solved _all my problems_.

```bash
conda info --env #list all environments
conda create --name igrf12 python=3.6 cmake pytest #create a new environment
conda activate igrf12 #activate the new environment

python -m pip install -e . #install igrf12
pytest #test installation
```

The ```numpy``` error could have also been solved by updating numpy through another channel like conda-forge but a seperate **_Environment_** allowed IGRF12 to be installed without affecting anything else. 

The above allowed me to install IGRF in a bare bones environment, additional packages could then be easily installed with ```conda install``` and ```pip```. 

## Evironments - Some Basics

There are several resources online that go into detail regarding **_Environments_** and one of the best is the [Anaconda docs][1]. Regardless here are some of the basics regarding **_Environments_**.

In the Anaconda prompt the base installation is identified by ```(base)``` at the start of the command line, which also identifies the currently active environment. To create and activate a new enviroment with the same Python version as you base installation you use:

```bash
# create and activate a new environment
conda create --name test 
conda activate test

# within the new environment you can install
# packages with pip and conda

#deactivate the new environment
conda deactivate
```

```bash
# create an environement with a specfic
# version of Python 
conda create --name Py27 python=2.7
```

```bash
# or with specefic packages
conda create --name test2 scipy numpy matplotlib
```

```bash
# list the avialable environments
conda env list
conda info --env

# to remove an environment
conda remove --name test2 --all
```

The Anaconda docs on [**_Environtments_**][1] goes into more detail regarding the above commands. It also discusses more complex tasks like sharing an environment for collaborations, which we'll cover here in a future post. There are also numerous web resources regarding Python environments that may be helpful including:

- [Towards Data Science][3], Anaconda environments in PyCharm.
- [freeCodeCamp][4], a more detailed discussion regarding environments. 

[1]:https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#sharing-an-environment
[2]:https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/stable/userguide/
[3]:https://towardsdatascience.com/python-data-science-environment-setting-up-anaconda-environments-for-working-on-data-science-8b4bfbc3cd39
[4]:https://medium.freecodecamp.org/why-you-need-python-environments-and-how-to-manage-them-with-conda-85f155f4353c
[5]:https://www.scivision.dev/
[6]:https://github.com/scivision/igrf12